Okay, you're going to tell me a story.
Very brief story of... Please, let me get you a clean... No, no, no, no, no, no.
I promise you we will... Okay.
Brief story is he and some friends have a game they play in the ghetto.
And the game is you run into the Jewish cemetery,
at night, which is very scary.
You're bleeding ghosts.
And you run as far into, in the dark of the night, and you put a stick into the ground.
And in the morning, the stick that is furthest into the cemetery is the bravest of the kids, okay?
He did this.
And one night, they all did this, and he ran, and they heard a blood-curdling scream, and they didn't wait to look and see.
They just ran home,
And in the morning, this was the story that stayed with me and scared me to death.
In the morning, they found one of their friends dead.
And what these little boys wore, these long Cossack things, what do you call them?
Religious Jews wear, it's like a coat, like a silken coat.
And in his desperation to get furthest into the cemetery, he plunged a stick, but he went through his own coat.
So he couldn't, so he thought of dead hands.
was pulling him down on the ground, and he got a heart failure.
He screamed.
That was a scream they heard, and he got a heart failure.
And my father must have told me thousands of stories.
It's the only one I remember, because I saw it as he was telling me.
I saw the little boy in the dark, trying to move, and not being able to move, so somebody's pulling him into the grave.
I still get the chills as I tell the story.
But that's the kind of story, and he didn't stop to think that this was...
This certainly had a lot to do with the storyteller that you referred.
Yeah, it's a vivid, passionate storyteller.
Or Adam being, this one you mustn't take off this thing, Adam being a very good religious Jew, Eve being a taunting Gentile lady.
That's how the whole trouble worked, if he stayed with a Jewish girl.
There was no Jewish girl, there was only her.
If you had something coming in 10 minutes, let me just get a couple of questions in.
You call books love objects.
Yeah.
What do you mean by that?
I sniff them, hug them, press them, great paper, pure red paper smells delicious, glue inside binding, end papers, the surface of just the sensuous objects.
I used to go to bed with books the way kids go to bed with teddy bears.
I had a favorite book my sister gave me.
felt and smelled wonderful.
I took it to bed with me.
You got The Prince and the Poplar.
It was The Prince and the Poplar.
I still have that same mangled copy from, you know, all my sexual assaults on that book.
The book has survived.
And that's what I mean by that.
And when you do a book on a... But where does that come from?
I have no idea.
Did you always love the books?
Always loved the books.
And it's almost like genetic.
My brother and my sister and
Don't forget, I was nine years younger, and then my sister was five years younger than my brother.
By the time I came into it, they were a reading library already.
I mean, there was an investment in reading my mother and father read.
They belonged to Yiddish clubs.
There were tons of books all over the house.
It was just the most natural thing in the world.
The added attraction, the beauty of books was something that, I don't know where that comes from.
Exactly.
Do you want some decap?
Or regular coffee.
It's instant.
You know what?
Do you have any more of this?
Oh, yeah.
I'll skip it, too.
You mentioned how you touch the objects and something comes from the object or the object.
But there are certain things that you've got even to get closer to the artist and the writer.
You mentioned in one piece how
When you were in Amsterdam, you went to visit Anne Frank and Van Gogh every day.
That was true.
We mentioned Buick.
What have you done to get close to Melville, for instance?
His first edition.
I have.
Have you ever worked physically to where he's been?
Oh, of course.
Sat in his chairs, lie down in his beds?
Not that I'm telling.
I've been to Arrowhead.
I've been allowed to go to a study.
I was allowed to sit in the chair that he sat in when he wrote Bobby Dick.
I could see Greylock, my grey locks for the window, who we dedicated Pierre to, because he'd given up on people and dedicated books to mountains after that.
I have had endless private conversations with Noble, studied his photographs.
When Herschel Parker wrote a big biography that came out, I did The Jacket.
That's a beautiful book.
It's a beautiful book.
No, I've gotten as close as a live person can get to a dead person through imaginary means, through aesthetic means, through reading, through collecting their first editions, through smelling their letters, through examining their handwriting.
I have Mozart letters where addressed to his father, I can't believe the same hand who wrote the concertos that I love and the symphonies that I love, the operas that I love, this is the same hand.
hand like my hand around there yeah the smell is on there his palm as he wrote is on there it's does it inspire your work does it get into your work yeah are we getting mystical here i can't i'm not a mystical man no i'm a very pragmatic person but something happens something happens and i don't know what it is
And I'm not implying some aliens that come and kidnapped me last night.
I think it's really oddly pragmatic, but I can't describe it.
I can't go with mystical, because I don't know what that means, and the associations to that word are so bad that I'm afraid of the word.
You know, you said earlier, well, I didn't go to college.
Neither did Lincoln, by the way.
I did one year of school.
You know, when I hear the measure is whether or not you've got a college degree, whether or not you, you know, Goebbels had a PhD.
Just remember that.
True.
I will.
And Lincoln only had one year of schooling, so... I know, it's all very arbitrary.
So... But we live in a very competitive culture.
I remember when I was going, when I finally did go to the arts students to calm my father down, there was this hierarchy between
real artists who died young and cut their ear off an emulation of Van Gogh, and us commercial whores who did illustration for Esquire and books.
There's always been that division between fine art and commercial art, between the artist or the educated person.
It's class division.
It's easier in England where everybody despises each other for being class divided.
The upstairs-downstairs division
In this country, we pretend there is no such division.
There are endless divisions.
And we all know what they are.
We all know our place.
And only through a great effort can we break through these invisible divisions and take on Shakespeare or take on Keats or take on... And then when I went to Berkeley, I was so impressed that they accepted me.
It's pathetic to hear myself say that.
Because they all esteemed me as an artist.
But they respected my mind.
Everything they had to say about Melville and Shakespeare, they took seriously, and some little part of them would say, holy malogy, these guys, these giants, these intellects, these professors.
Let me tell you what the woman, the managing editor of Smithsonian, said when I teased her with your name.
She said, anything as Sendak, she said, I hate to use this phrase, she said, but in my estimation, we're talking about a living legend.
You know, a person who I believe is even transcended
You know, I don't mean to lay this on like this, but I'm telling you, I'm a journalist.
I'm reporting what somebody says, and I happen to share the sentiment.
I mean, I can't tell you how really delighted I am to be here.
What I really would like to do is go home, transcribe this tape, study it, and maybe let's do a part two.
Can we do a part two?
No, let's do a part two, which is really important to me.
And we'll do it right.
I'm asking you more than you're asking me.
I need your input.
You've got connections.
Well, I'll do everything I can if you don't let me come back.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'd like to.
That's why I wanted to make that trip.
And I'm going to see Helen Vendler in about a month.
Maybe we can, you know, maybe we'll shut out the tape recorder and you can give me an idea of the kinds of things you want me to look for.
Yeah.
I mean, some Keats books are, well, let's not do it now.
Okay.
We should do what you need now.
I think we're in good shape.
We mentioned the books, the kinds of things you've done to get close to what it is.
Again, I was driving at something we talked about.
You don't have the university education.
We're talking about George Bernard Shaw, who was totally a product of what he read in the British Library.
Virginia Woolf was totally uneducated.
Everything she, the new biography, she's totally a product of her reading.
If you read her journal, she gets pissed off when life intrudes on her reading.
I was just reading a little book on Proust that just came out about everything you can learn from reading Proust.
It's a sort of smart-ass book.
It's clever.
Oh, I know the book.
Yeah, I read it right over there.
I have it, yeah.
But what's touching is just that, because he quotes from her journal on reading Proust.
She can't stand it.
It's done.
It's done, she felt it.
What am I going to do?
What tiny little voice do I have compared to this great... She knew immediately she was reading a great genius.
And she took it very personally.
She was very competitive.
We all take it very personally, but I think, actually, without being hyperbolic, or at least attempting not to be hyperbolic, that gives me the greatest joy.
I don't feel the competition.
I don't feel... How can anybody compete with these people?
I mean, forget it.
Why even think about it?
And you know what worries me about not being able to use visionary, what's the word we couldn't deal with, spiritual?
Look at William Blake.
He used the word all the time.
And he was a hard-ass man.
He really was of this earth.
I mean, he is some respectable person, respectable person.
So when he can use phrases like that and dream visionary things,
I'm very curious about what all that is and how you can use that language seriously without sounding like a pompous asshole.
And see, Blake did it.
And when Keats talks about soul-making, those letters to George, his brother George in Kentucky, and his sister-in-law Georgiana, the two Georges, and he talks about soul-making and how
brain and the heart work together to create the spirit it's not religious because he was vehemently agnostic and anti-church so this is the artist talking about the soul and the spirit and Blake did and you have to begin to take it seriously like hey what are they saying that you could use that is your old skepticism is getting in your own way because you're afraid to think in these
large and generous terms.
Keats wasn't afraid.
He was the least fettered artist almost that I know of.
His sexuality is bursting grapes against his tongue, the way he uses his mouth, the way he uses his palate, the way he uses his body.
The eat of St.
Agnes, the way she gets fucked is so incredibly hot.
This was a passionate, vivid human being.
It is wonderful.
You know, Blake, you think of Blake, it seems to me that you immerse yourself in these texts, the way he immerses himself.
He couldn't do Dante unless he, he couldn't read a translation of Dante.
I mean, the way you're going to Shakespeare, the way you're going to Keats, it seems to me that's the way Blake had to go to Dante.
Well, except he was blanking on me.
I'm making comparisons.
No, but he went with visions.
He went with visions.
It was a wonderful exhibition that
Yale, The Mellon, a month ago.
All their blakes, unbelievable.
It was such a renewal for me to just see it again and feel it again.
Do you still love pop-up books, by the way?
Not as much.
I think what's happening unwittingly is trailing away from publishing.
Because it's... And we haven't even talked about what you're doing.
I know, because this will be part two, I think.
Yeah, I'm so depressed.
We have to get into the music and the operas and the ballets and this kind of stuff.
I mean, Jim has hooked me back into publishing because of the anniversary, but also I'm about to illustrate a book by James Marshall, which when I was with him as often as I could while he was in the dying process, he talked about the owl and the pussycat, but she had always had rough watercolors for Richard Gregg.
And he wondered, could they be published?
Of course they could be published.
Now Harper's, I've been supervising the printing of it and the mechanics of it, doing everything he would have done, hoping I'm doing as well as he wants to.
Then he left a manuscript at his death, which is absolutely written for his own particular talent.
I'm illustrating it.
My book, On the Table, I'm not worried about comparisons.
I know Jim would do this better because he wrote for himself, as I write for myself.
But he can't do it.
He's dead.
So how do I... What do I need to know about Jim, by the way, that I don't know?
I mean, these two things I don't even know about now.
These are projects and work.
Well, the book at Harpers is called Swine Lake.
Swine Lake.
A hilarious takeoff on ballet people in his most sardonic wit.
It's a hilarious book to illustrate.
And it'll be fun, except it'll make me miss him every day more.
But what else can I tell you?
The Owl and the Pussycat.
I wrote a tiny little piece for that.
So I am going to do a book.
I mean, I'm going to have to put aside all my Shakespeare, Keats, whatever that is, over here for a while and tend to swine like.
This is kind of something you're doing for a
Yeah, for Buddy.
And how did you get to know him, by the way?
I mean, did he write you?
No, I remember exactly the occasion.
I remember exactly the occasion.
I don't remember the year, but you can check on the year.
Maybe in the 60s or 70s.
Margot Zemach, who was a great illustrator.
You know her work.
She was a wonderful friend.
Harv Zemach, her husband was a wonderful friend.
He died.
And then Margot won
miraculously, she won the Colicotta Award.
And I believe it was in San Francisco.
And I was so happy for her.
I mean, this was a tortured lady, and she so deserved it.
And she's one of those Jim Marshall people.
She definitely is in that same class with Jim, the divacity of the work.
No one was like Margot.
And she deserves exactly what Jim is getting now, posthumously.
She deserves somebody to reconsider her
and figure out how come this fantastic woman has been forgotten.
Anyway, it was at her Call to Cut Award party, and I believe it was San Francisco, and I was sitting at a table, and this guy came over with this sardonic sort of Free Musketeers flourish up like that, and it was Jim.
That's nice.
And he was very young.
He was...
Maybe, I'm 69, he died, I think he was 50, so I'm 19 years older, 18 years older when he died.
He was about my age.
Yeah.
And great fan of my books.
I did not know his stuff except I knew his name, and I quickly invested in looking at his stuff.
It was one of those rare things where you can like the person and like the work.
How many times did that happen?
But you don't have to flub.
You know, I showed him my stuff.
He was so candid, I want to break his mouth once in a while.
And I was the same with him.
We were very, very clear with each other about respecting each other's work and veracities and all of that.
We got to be good friends right there at Marco's party.
And he was like Arnold Lobel, like some of the younger people, generation younger than me, who were really great, and Margot Zemach.
Not exactly I wasn't old enough truly to be mentors to them, but a little bit.
A little bit.
I was giving them what Crockett Johnson and Ruth Krauss had given to me, which was an enormous kind of encouragement and talking.
See, what I miss most is I have nobody to mentor.
You know, they don't get to me, really.
I'm far away from the whole business of publishing.
A lot of people think I'm croaked.
You're doing other things now, too.
Yeah, and I used to teach.
I love teaching.
I was teaching at Yale, and then I taught these Parsons.
It was fun, and I had to give it up because it interrupted the work, and then operas and designing for the state.
I was 10 years doing that.
But I really, it's in my blood.
See, I have a children's theater, which we haven't even talked about.
Next time.
But that's the place where I'm mentoring.
Okay, children's theater.
I'm going to write this down.
Actually, you say you've got somebody coming like now, right?
He'll show up any moment.
Okay.
Well, let's just keep that going.
He won't mind.
He'll come in and sit for a minute.
Don't matter.
Would you sign a couple of books for me?
I'm sorry to cut off.
No, no, no.
Do you want me to give you a call?
Do I have a call instead of that?
Yeah.
And when's good for you?
Probably the latter part of this month.
Okay.
Or better, early September.
That would be good.
Because then all of October, I'm going, I'll be in Houston because the hospital is opening.
And so I'll be there for the production.
Please, could you?
Maybe get a wife because I want to autograph this.
You know what?
Well, why not?
You don't mind doing it.
No, of course not.
Do you have a catalog that...
Rosenback did on Dracula?
I bought it.
Okay.
I just came in.
Thank you.
I should have brought it.
I'll bring it down.
Yeah, we'll do it the next time.
As you can see.
That's all right.
Take them out.
You don't mind?
No.
I just want to get a better pen.
This is a good one.
How about that?
Oh, that's even better.
Hi.
This is Ivan.
Oh, Ivan.
Brad Payne.
Hi, Lloyd.
Nice to meet you.
Scott's here?
Yeah.
Is he with you?
Yes, he'll wait.
Tell him I'll be done in a very short time.
Great.
Okay.
Point out that nursery rhymes were not written for children.
Never were.
They were political salaries.
So you talk about the quality books.
How beautiful this book is.
Look at that.
It's beautiful.
Sinful.
It's like a box of chocolates.
My girls are Nicole and I see Barbara first.
She's the older.
Barbara and Nicole.
Each of my girls, by the way, has a signed Sendak poster in their rooms, which I don't remember, but I was in a line at
an AVA out in California, got in line twice.
You were doing one HarperCollins 1 and one FSG.
I remember that occasion, but I can't remember what it was.
You said to me, you're very persistent.
I said, I am indeed.
Vangely rings a bell, because I wanted both.
And I went right along, right back, and I was afraid I was going to get the other one.
Is it M-I-C-O-L-E?
Yeah.
That's funny.
But that...
You know, the nursery rhymes were developed.
There were political salaries.
There were jokes on the Queen of England, the Scottish Queen.
And then when they lost their political meaning, they were like haiku.
Nobody knew what they meant.
So let's give it to the kids.
They'll make something out of it.
It's like Grimm.
Never meant for the kids.
The two brothers were mortified.
The kids were reading their august tomes.
Boy, that Dear Millie was quite an experience, wasn't it?
Quite.
That was a good being.
That was a hard book.
Yeah.
Then these are just for me.
I want to spell your nut.
It's Nicholas, like regular Nicholas.
Yeah, it's my Nicholas.
Oh, you're wonderful.
Yeah, that's great.
I love this book.
They do nice things.
Candlewood.
Yep.
Oh, it's fine, though.
That's fine.
Why not?
Nick is fine, too, actually.
Good handwriting.
I'm going to write the same thing because I mean the same thing.
That's fine.
And I know you've got somebody else.
You can just sign these.
Put them in my hand.
This means a lot to me, this catalog, actually.
This is... It's a pretty catalog.
But it's kind of what I... I would hold it open for a moment.
Yeah.
But it has meaning for me, you know, for very specific.
It's your collection and it's your books.
And you'll see when you get into my book how much I owe to the Rosenbach, by the way.
Oh, well, that's a whole other conversation.
Well, that's, you know, all my letters from Rosenbach and Huntington and the Shiteys, and I spent a week doing research down there.
Great place.
Oh, it's...
I think you're – I will put this on, actually.
Now, are they – is that the repository for your stuff?
Yeah, yep.
That's kind of – Yeah, there's all things related to my books, Spanish books go there.
And why is that?
Why not Harvard, Yale, or some such place?
Well, it's because I like it.
I like the smallness of it.
I like the fact that the pictures are available.
Some of the universities take things, and they put them in vaults, and it's like burying them alive.
Tell me what the good of that is.
The Rosenbach will have little exhibitions.
You can make appointments.
You can go up and see.
Students can look at the pictures.
So they're alive.
They stay alive.
They take care of them.
They take care of all my babies.
I can't take care of them.
That's great.
You can just sign this if you want.
There's somebody here.
That's right.
This is your last one, right?
That's it.
I think I can take the time to put your name on.
Kind of, kind of.
So you'd say that September would be better than August?
I would check in towards the end of August, see how things are going.
Okay.
That would be good.
I'm going up to San Francisco next month, going to Italy.
Whose house do you want to be?
Keith's house.
Yeah, what else?
And I want to go to the house he died in on top of the Spanish steps in Rome.
I want to go to the Protestant cemetery where he's buried in Rome.
And I want to see Rome.
And I want to eat a type of food.
and they want to die in Italy.
That's really what I want to do.
But this is all really for this project.
Yeah.
No, it's for you.
It's desperately for me, because I have not been in Europe for so long, and I miss it terribly.
And I really, if I have to be totally honest, it is Italy I miss terribly.
I'm going to go see Father Boyle at the Vatican Library.
I'm going to go to the Medici Library.
And I feel the same way.
I cannot write about these places unless I go... I'm going to smell them and be there.
I'm going to open at Pergamum in Asia Minor, which is the oldest library.
It's still there.
Isn't it today?
Yes.